This microchip can take up to 26 weeks to make
in its as many as 100 layers
billions of transistors are packed into an area about the size of a fingernail.
They're the brains behind almost everything we use in our increasingly electronic world.
Here's how these complex tiny devices are made.
The process begins with silicon-rich sand.
Why silicon?
Silicon is a semiconductor.
It's the sweet spot between an insulator and a pure conductor.
That means its properties such as its conductivity can be altered
by adding impurities or doping to meet the needs of different electronic devices.
This also allows us to control the electrical signals that pass through.
Silicon is also abundant it's one of the 10 most common elements found on earth.
But much of the silicon found in the wild is chemically bound to oxygen
so the two elements must be separated.
The sand is combined with carbon
and melted in crucibles to produce carbon monoxide and 99 pure silicon.
After further processing ultrapure silicon is produced.
Next a seed crystal is placed in contact with molten silicon.
As the seed crystal is slowly pulled away silicon atoms are deposited on the bottom surface.
The result is a large cylindrical boule or a single crystal ingot of pure silicon.
The boule is then thinly sliced into wafers.
Silicon wafers typically have diameters of 1 to 12 inches
with the most state-of-the-art facilities being able to produce wafers up to 18 inches in diameter.
bigger wafers are of course able to yield more microchips.
Once the silicon wafers are cut the production process begins in full.
Microchips are made in extremely sterile conditions
free from contaminants such as dust.
If even just one particle of dust makes its way onto a silicon wafer
the entire batch is at risk of being ruined.
This would derail a process that can take an average of 12 weeks.
The first step of the production process is deposition.
A thin non-conducting layer of silicon dioxide is grown or deposited on the surface of the wafer.
Then the silicon wafer is prepared for lithography
by coating it with photosensitive and light resistant materials.
The next step is very critical: exposure.
The prepared silicon wafers enter a lithography machine
and are exposed to UV light passed through a reticle containing the chip's blueprint.
The areas exposed to light are hardened
while unexposed areas are then etched away by hot gases
to leave a three-dimensional microchip.
The electrical conductivity of different parts of the chip can also be altered by doping them with chemicals under heat and pressure.
This process can be repeated hundreds of times for the same chip 
producing a more complex integrated circuit at each step.
To create conducting paths between the components
a thin layer of metal such as aluminum is overlaid onto the chip
and the etching process is used to remove everything except the thin conducting pathways.
Several layers of conductors separated by glass insulators can be
laid down.
Each chip on the wafer is then tested for performance
before it's separated from other chips on the wafer by a saw.
Since microchips are essentially circuits built on an incredibly small scale
they have a basic set of components.
Capacitors can temporarily store an electrical charge.
Resistors help control the electrical current.
Transistors can either amplify or switch the electrical signals passing through.
For more advanced chips like those found on high-end graphics cards,
there can be upwards of 28 billion transistors on board.
More transistors on microchips allow them to send out more instructions, increasing the computational power.
Moore's law predicts that computer chip manufacturing would advance at a steady
rate
allowing transistor counts to double every two years.
Based on the sheer power of the technology we use on a day-to-day basis
this decade's old prediction seems to still be mostly true.
Manufacturers have been shrinking down their transistor sizes to fit more onto chips.
Each breakthrough in transistor size
has allowed the production of more powerful chips for our phones computers and gaming consoles.
In recent years they've gotten each transistor down to as small as
eight times ten to the power of negative eight inches in diameter
allowing an amazing 50 billion transistors to be crammed onto a single chip.
Manufacturing microchips is truly one of our most complex feats
and yet innovations are happening every day.