These towering machines are getting ever more powerful
nowhere is that more and show than at this test center in Northern Denmark.
"It is the latest and biggest turbines that they have the prototypes.
This is like seeing the testing the future right here".
The largest a staggering 280 meters high has broken world records for the most power,
and experts say they're only getting bigger:
"This race towards bigger and bigger turbine will continue for a while more.
We are looking into the possibility of creating a new test center in Denmark
and the design turbine we are designing for is 450m from ground to highest tip".
By 2030 wind power could Supply a fifth of the world's electricity.
We need clean energy but this green industry has a growing headache when it comes to waste:
"Turbines are built to withstand the forces of nature they're flexible light and super strong
but that's also where the problem Lies when they reach the end of life they're really hard to recycle".
While the steel and the towers can be reused the massive blades are almost indestructible
and as older models are replaced many get dumped in landfill,
by 2050 there could be 43 million tons of redundant blades globally that need to be dealt with.
"It is problematic because we want the renewable energy to be truly sustainable
and if you have a waste material that goes to landfilling it's not truly sustainable".
It's a problem players have been scrambling to figure out.
And we might now have some answers there have been creative ways of reusing wind turbine blades,
like this bike shed.
They've even been repurposed for playgrounds bridges and building cladding
but this won't really tackle the growing volumes.
One immediate solution is to chop up and finally shred them.
It's burned as fuel and used as an ingredient for cement production.
This us plant has already handled more than 32,000 unwanted blades.
Now turbine maker Siemens Gamesa has had a breakthrough of its own,
it manufactures some of the world's biggest blades at its sight here in Aalborg,
and while this one looks like any other it can be recycled.
It all comes down to a resin called epoxy which acts like a really strong superglue binding together the fiberglass.
Usually this is incredibly tough to break down
but not here: "We changed something in the backbone of the chemistry
this base has actually gone through our recycling process, and we just turn it around,
here you can see all the different glass layers that were placed during the production of the blade
and how they are separating from the blade".
To do that it needs to be soaked in a big bath of mild acetic acid.
"After a few hours and 80° Celsius and then you get the result that you see here".
"So it's just like vinegar in a supermarket!"
"Exactly! Exactly like you would make pickles or descale your coffee pot".
"I can actually smell that there is a scent of vinegar coming from the blade".
This won't tackle today's waste but when these blades retire the materials could go into making other things.
"We could build furniture, suitcases... you could use it for surfboard manufacturing, etc... so in general consumer goods".
"But not new turbines?.."
"Not as it is right now, but I'm never going to say never".
So far only a small number have been installed but they'll soon be used for bigger offshore projects here in Europe.
At this research lab at Aarhus University scientists are taking a different approach.
"This was part of a winter blade that was decommissioned, basically put the tip in there and then we add a catalyst.
They've discovered a chemical process that gently breaks apart the components.
Precise details are still under wrapped but it turns out it's relatively simple.
"These are the glass fibers which kind of come apart a little bit..."
"Yes, I can see those."
"Because they're not bound together anymore".
"So you can see it's very clearly separated into it different components".
That means the fibers and even that tough epoxy resin could be recovered and potentially reused.
"This has been quite remarkable we thought that these materials were extremely strong and indestructible,
now we found a chemical process that can actually chew its way right through the epoxy".
And in theory it could work on all kinds of turbine blades already out there.
"What we find exciting is we're sort of the first to be able to do that.
There are potentials in recycling such very tough materials
not only confined to the wind turbine industry there's the aeronautic industry, space industry, cars..."
This technology still needs to make the leap from a test tube to the real world
but with new solutions on the table perhaps this growing waste problem could be headed off before it gets too big.